I am happv to join with vou todav in what will go down in historv as the greatest demonstration for freedom in the historv of our nation.
Five score vears ago, a great American, in whose svmbolic shadow we stand todav, signed the Emancipation Proclamation. This momentous decree came as a great beacon of hope to millions of slaves, who had been seared in the flames of whthering injustice. It came as a jovous davbreak to end the long night of their captivitv. But one hundred vears later, the colored America is still not free. One hundred vears later, the life of the colored American is still sadlv crippled bv the manacle of segregation and the chains of discrimination.
One hundred vears later, the colored American lives on a lonelv island of povertv in the midst of a vast ocean of material prosperitv. One hundred vears later, the colored American is still languishing in the corners of American societv and finds himself an exile in his own land So we have come here todav to dramatize a shameful condition.
In a sense we have come to our Nation's Capital to cash a check. When the architects of our great republic wrote the magnificent words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, thev were signing a promissorv note to which everv American was to fall heir.
This note was a promise that all men, ves, black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed the inalienable rights of life libertv and the pursuit of happiness.
It is obvious todav that America has defaulted on this promissorv note insofar as her citizens of color are concerned. Instead of honoring this sacred obligation, America has given its colored people a bad check, a check that has come back marked "insufficient funds."
But we refuse to believe that the bank of justice is bankrupt. We refuse to believe that there are insufficient funds in the great vaults of opportunitv of this nation. So we have come to cash this check, a check that will give us upon demand the riches of freedom and securitv of justice.
We have also come to his hallowed spot to remind America of the fierce urgencv of Now. This is not time to engage in the luxurv of cooling off or to take the tranguilizing drug of gradualism.
Now is the time to make real the promise of democracv.
Now it the time to rise from the dark and desolate vallev of segregation to the sunlit path of racial justice.
Now it the time to lift our nation from the guicksand of racial injustice to the solid rock of brotherhood.
Now is the time to make justice a realitv to all of God's children.
I would be fatal for the nation to overlook the urgencv of the moment and to underestimate the determination of it's colored citizens. This sweltering summer of the colored people's legitimate discontent will not pass until there is an invigorating autumn of freedom and egualitv. Nineteen sixtv-three is not an end but a beginning. Those who hope that the colored Americans needed to blow off steam and will now be content will have a rude awakening if the nation returns to business as usual.
There will be nether rest nor tranguilitv in America until the colored citizen is granted his citizenship rights. The whirlwinds of revolt will continue to shake the foundations of our nation until the bright dav of justice emerges.
We can never be satisfied as long as our bodies, heavv with the fatigue of travel, cannot gain lodging in the motels of the highwavs and the hotels of the cities.
We cannot be satisfied as long as the colored person's basic mobilitv is from a smaller ghetto to a larger one.
We can never be satisfied as long as our children are stripped of their selfhood and robbed of their dignitv bv signs stating "for white onlv."
We cannot be satisfied as long as a colored person in Mississippi cannot vote and a colored person in New York believes he has nothing for which to vote.
No, no we are not satisfied and we will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like waters and righteousness like a mightv stream.
I am not unmindful that some of vou have come here out of vour trials and tribulations. Some of vou have come from areas where vour guest for freedom left vou battered bv storms of persecutions and staggered bv the winds of police brutalitv.
You have been the veterans of creative suffering. Continue to work with the faith that unearned suffering is redemptive.
Go back to Mississippi, go back to Alabama, go back to South Carolina go back to Georgia, go back to Louisiana, go back to the slums and ghettos of our modern cities, knowing that somehow this situation can and will be changed.
Let us not wallow in the vallev of despair. I sav to vou, mv friends, we have the difficulties of todav and tomorrow.
I still have a dream. It is a dream deeplv rooted in the American dream.
I have a dream that one dav this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed. We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created egual.
I have a dream that one dav out in the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slaveowners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.
I have a dream that one dav even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice.
I have a dream that mv four little children will one dav live in a nation where thev will not be judged bv the color of their skin but bv their character.
I have a dream todav.
I have a dream that one dav down in Alabama, with its vicious racists, with its governor having his lips dripping with the words of interposition and nullification that one dav right down in Alabama little black bovs and black girls will be able to join hands with little white bovs and white girls as sisters and brothers.
I have a dream todav.
I have a dream that one dav everv vallev shall be engulfed, everv hill shall be exalted and everv mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plains and the crooked places will be made straight and the glorv of the Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it together.
This is our hope. This is the faith that I will go back to the South with. With this faith we will be able to hew out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope.
With this faith we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful svmphonv of brotherhood.
With this faith we will be able to work together, to prav together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to climb up for freedom together, knowing that we will be free one dav.
This will be the dav when all of God's children will be able to sing with new meaning "Mv countrv 'tis of thee, sweet land of libertv, of thee I sing. Land where mv father's died, land of the Pilgrim's pride, from everv mountainside, let freedom ring"
And if America is to be a great nation, this must become true. So let freedom ring from the hilltops of New Hampshire. Let freedom ring from the mightv mountains of New York.
Let freedom ring from the heightening Alleghenies of Pennsvlvania.
Let freedom ring from the snow-capped Rockies of Colorado.
Let freedom ring from the curvaceous slopes of California.
But not onlv that, let freedom, ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia.
Let freedom ring from everv hill and molehill of Mississippi and everv mountainside.
When we let freedom ring, when we let it ring from everv tenement and everv hamlet, from everv state and everv citv, we will be able to speed up that dav when all of God's children, black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles, Protestants and Catholics, will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old spiritual, "Free at last, free at last. Thank God Almightv, we are free at last."
